1.  Barnes, Trevor J. and Hayter, Robert. 2005. No "Greek-Letter Writing": Local Models of Resource Economies. Growth and Change 36(4): 453-470

Models tend to be universalist constructions, abstracting from reality to represent causal relations among variables
However, this is not the only kind of useful model, particularly when examining local resource economies
Universal models have the advantage of, as their proponents argue, transcending the specific, making context irrelevant
Local models by contrast do not make a claim of universal applicability, and emphasize the benefits of sensitivity to local concerns
Through Veblen, an argument was made from within economics that cultural values, institutions, do matter, context is important
In many places, economic concerns can only be understood if other things - culture, geography, so on, are explicitly accounted for
Locally specific models can be useful and powerful tools in understanding dynamics despite their lack of permanent global accuracy


2.  Bell, Michael M. 2007. The two-ness of rural life and the ends of rural scholarship. Journal of Rural Studies 23: 402-415

The 'First Rural' is the material moment of the rural, but it is not always clear what is meant - significant government/academic confusion
This rural often fails to include people, defines rural according to over-specific and arbitrary boundaries (population, density)
Before such definitions, occupation largely defined rural, but this is vulnerable to reduction in people with 'rural' occupations, travel to cities
Issues with rural/urban dichotomy similar to man/woman as identified in feminist theory - one has primacy, is default, companion is lesser, other
A political economic view of rural, seeing it as victim of capital, is perhaps more compelling - still insufficient
Second rural is the rural of ideas, the ideal moment of rural, its associations in people's minds and how people describe it
This is something that has been around a long time, but is commonly now rooted in post-modernism and deconstruction of the 'rural idyll'
Ideas can be critiqued for their lack of impact, but it seems reasonable to believe that ideas have material consequences, so 2nd rural impacts 1st
There is room in rural studies not for forced unity, but pluralism in approaches, although they should not deny one another



3.  Castle, Emery N., Wu, Junjie, Weber, Bruce A. 2011. Place Orientation and Rural-Urban Interdependence. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 33(2): 1-26

Place seen as emergent from interactions of Geography, Community, and Local Jurisdiction

Rural places are seen to exhibit five characteristics:

	Co-existence of centralization and decentralization, roiled changing landscape
	Rural America is highly diverse in terms of population and landscapes
	Rural, but also urban, areas affected by exogenous forces - economic, social, political, tech.
	Poverty, low income found everywhere, but variable in their depth, reasons
	Rural land use is a key variable affecting natural resource/enviro. policy

Three assumptions underpin this proposed framework/model:

	Comparative Advantage emerges locally from human & natural enviro., allows local decisions
	US federalism allows for local autonomy in some degree, local policy decisions
	People and place are inseparable, joint examination needed to understand rural America

This framework proposes that people must orient relative to a place in one of 3 possible ways

A person can be inside or outside a place, interactions/aspirations possible in 3 dimensions:

	I to I	Inside to Inside	Inside position with Inside aspirations
	O to I	Outside to Inside	Outside position with Inside aspirations
	I to O	Inside to Outside	Inside position with Outside aspirations

I-I indicates people in a place who seek to interact with factors/people also inside the place
O-I indicates people located outside a place, who have aspirations/interests/desires inside the place
I-O indicates people located inside a place, whose aspirations/interests/desires are external to plac


4.  Chen, Yong, and Weber, Bruce. 2013. Federal Forest Policy and Community Vitality in the Pacific Northwest: How Did the Northwest Forest Plan Affect Population, Wealth and Income in Rural Communities? Working Paper Number RSP 1301, Rural Studies Program, Oregon State University

The 1994 Northwest Forest plan led to 11 million acres of forest land being moved from productive use to protection
Net migration did not compensate for the employment loss caused by institution of NWFP
Typically, assessment of amenity impacts takes place at the county level, but sub-county level demonstrates differentiated impact
Proximity to forests, despite amenity benefits, saw lower growth and more lost population than in communities further from the forests
Amenity impacts where present will tend to manifest over longer temporal timeframes than loss of logging employment, which is an immediate thing


5.  Davies, Jocelyn, White, Janelle, Wright, Alyson, Maru, Yiheyis, Maru, LaFlamme, Michael. 2008. Applying the sustainable livelihoods approach in Australian desert Aboroginal development. The Rangeland Journal 30: 55-65

Sustainable livelihoods is an approach widely applied in international development, but not so much to aboriginal Australia
Aboriginals in Australia suffer from poor health, low income, significant social issues, rooted in interactions with Australian institutions
Non-market values key to Aboriginal lands, use of the 5 capitals framework as part of sustainable livelihood approach warranted
Livelihood is more than a job, but includes health, quality of life, cultural considerations
Involves using a systems model to conceptually situate people's lives, recognizes dynamism and multiple dependencies
Aboriginal culture historically tied to difficult landscape, particularly in deserts, with kin sharing, customary law, trade networks, diverse labor use
In direct study, both material flows and cultural values were found to be of strong importance to Aboriginal community members
Ultimately, sustainable livelihoods is about ensuring vulnerability mitigation, coupled economic and social/cultural activity, local livelihood strategy


6.  Fisher, Dana R. 2001. Resource Dependency and Rural Poverty: Rural Areas in the United States and Japan. Rural Sociology 66(2): 181-202

Distance to a metro area and proximity to forested land are both strong positive indicators of rural poverty in Hokkaido and Wisconsin
However, sectoral employment differed entirely in its relationship with poverty between the two case studies
Capturing service employment seems to be the most viable form of rural econ development for most communities


7.  Grudens-Schuck, Nancy, Allen, Will, Hargrove, Tasha M., Kilvington, Margaret. 2003. Renovating dependency and self-reliance for participatory sustainable development. Agriculture and Human Values 20: 53-64

A significant issue in sustainability writ large is the tendency for human-centric issues to be overwhelmed by the material concerns
Participatory approaches can be useful in connecting humans to sustainability, but can be negatively impacted by education which promotes domination
Dependency can result even from efforts to promote self-reliance as outsiders appear to be dominating discussions and processes
Self-reliance needs to be instituted but in phases, with external individuals slowly removing themselves post-training


8.  Halfacree, Keith. 2007. Trial by space for a 'radical rural': Introducing alternative localities, representations, and lives. Journal of Rural Studies 23: 125-141

There appears to be widespread agreement that rural places are experiencing particularly rapid change, melds well with geo utopian interest (recent)
Adapting Lefebvre, a model of rural space with 3 dimensions can be produced, with rural space being combination of practices, representation, and space
Spatial practices delimit physical boundaries, similar to locality, about "material expression and socal reproduction"
Representations of space are tied to how elites/professionals imagine space and detail it in writing, diagrams, jargon
Spaces of representation are connected to the directly lived space, the symbolisms people with lived experience rely on, contested by marginal groups
In effect, these can be rephrased in a triumvirate model of locality, representations of rural, and rural lives, space bounded by these poles
'Productivist' countryside dominated by agricultural locality, government definition of rural, farmers feeling secure
Rural areas are differentiating, largely along regional lines, into multifunctionality at times, but also new forms of specifically used space
Simultaneously seen are super-productivism (re-intensification), Consuming idylls (amenities), effacement (rural ceases to exist) and radical
Radical rural spaces are not one thing, can even range from national-socialist valorization of rural to anti-capitalist eco focus
Radical rural "revolves around environmentally embedded, decentralised, and relatively self-sufficient and self-reliant living ptterns"
Tied to 1: Low impact development, 2: permaculture/organic ag, 3: additional other activities/holism/crafts, 4: perception of sources/flows in locality
Localisation emphasis and land-based activities are key self-identity forms
Ultimately, idea must undergo 'trial by space', in other words, actually exist to demonstrate its value


9.  Halfacree, Keith. 2012. Diverse Ruralities in the 21st Century: From Effacement to (Re-)Invention. In International Handbook of Rural Demography

Rural is periodically argued to be a non-useful category in academic studies, not worth pursuing, not truly distinctive
This argument is rooted in assuming a fixed notion of 'rural' which is not entirely legitimate
It is key to note that popular perception of an entity known as 'rural' (idealist) creates direct material consequences
Perception of the rural idyll is strong in society, impacting migration patterns, so even if economically rural is endangered, in thought not so much
In effect, arguments against rural fail to accept diversity in the term, diversity which is longstanding and not easy to wish away


10.  Hibbard, Michael & Lurie, Susan. 2013. The New Natural Resource Economy. Society & Natural Resources 26:7, 827-844.104

Rural populations have declined during the 20th Century, and along with them rural economic health has declined
Rural areas typically rely on primary production - agriculture and natural resources - for their economic productivity
Industrialization, Specialization, Standardization, Consolidation, and the Commodity production orientation of society are rural banes
A new paradigm is emerging, that of the New Natural Resource Economy, which seeks to diversify rural economic activity
Rural people appear to value their state of existence enough to accept lower wages and income, but poverty is now endemic
They are rebuilding around the natural resources they are typically proximate to, but not focusing on only one industry/company
Money that enters rural regions tends to have outsized effects than its simple dollar amount would seem to indicate
Payment for Ecosystem Services is a reasonable concept rooted in the hidden benefits external agents gain from natural systems
Community supported agriculture systems and other small-scale production initiatives can scale to the needs of rural areas
Stability has long been sought but has remained elusive for rural communities dependent on commodity production: resilience is better
Resilient communities under NNRE have 3 dimensions: A traded sector, import replacement, and ensuring local goods availability
A traded sector where goods can be produced for sale externally is still important, but can't be the entire focus
Import replacement involves local production of goods and services where feasible to avoid cash outflows
Ensuring availability of local goods means promoting local businesses and service providers to meet needs locally
Grant County, Umatilla County, and Vernonia are 3 examples of movements towards more resilient NNRE economies
Rural communities rely on very small businesses and natural capital, their location will most always ensure these are the case
NNRE fits well with the emerging idea of multifunctionality, utilizing landscape to provide multiple values


11.  Little, Jo. 2001. New Rural Governance? Progress in Human Geography 25(1): 97-102

A key argument in contemporary rural geography has been that a capitalist mode of accumulation has shifted from Fordism to post-Fordism
Regulation is changing, a shifted emphasis on governance mechanisms which seek partnership with rural communities taking place
But it is not certain this apparent emphasis on bottom up, rural as the driver, is more than rhetoric, may mask existing power dynamics
Variation exists in governance taking place in rural areas, so this is a viable avenue of research in the future



12.  Marsden, Terry, and Murdoch, Jonathan. 1998. Editorial: The Shifting Nature of Rural Governance and Community Participation. Journal of Rural Studies 14:(1), 1-4

Concerns of those who govern rural areas are shifting as agriculture loses its hegemonic position, leading to a new debate about rural 'governance'
Governance is characterized by new institutions, coordinated policy between govt, NGO, others, creating new 'topography of social relations'
This topography is changing the status quo, requiring new means of handling rural issues, a potentially difficult situation


13.  McCarthy, James. 2006. Rural geography: alternative rural economies the search for alterity in forests, fisheries, food, and fair trade. Progress in Human Geography 30:6, 803-811

A number of efforts have been made to identify and understand rural economies on an alternative basis, emphasizing local production/consumption
'Alterity' encompasses not just food networks, but forest certification, community forests, fisheries, and the like
Gibson-Graham in 1996 called for recognizing and enacting alternatives to capitalist systems, both functions being equally important
The 'rural' is a common site for considering alterity, given proximity to production embeddedness of economic concerns in the idea of local
Community forests have existed in industrialized contexts as affront to capitalism as well as sites for multifunctionality debates
There are dangers to community forests in the form of elite capture, democratization may not be as strongly tied as desired
Similarly, certification schemes have suffered from barriers to entry to small producers, have not always had desired results
Fisheries have dealt with some of the same issues as forests, particularly with respect to certification issues
Food networks have similarly experienced problems getting established, with certification schemes not perfoming as predicted, becoming more capitalist
Embracing the idea of 'alternative' means specifying alternative to what, and what makes them alternative in nature
Production/exchange are still vital in most 'alternative' products, they do not entirely eschew capitalist dynamics
The 'Alternative' and 'Conventional' options may represent an unsustainable duality, with some things not being purely either
Alternative systems have not really changed much so far, and it remains to be seen how much they simply follow previous patterns


14.  McCarthy, James. 2008. Rural geography: globalizing the countryside. Progress in Human Geography 32(1): 129-137

Although the status of rural communities is changing in the globalized world, they are not immune to it - they are being pushed to offer something new
Rural-urban dichotomy is still present, with the urban assumed to be crowded, noisy, dirty, and the rural to be idyllic, natural, quiet, safe, communal
But this is less progress, and more a continuation of dichotomy that is rooted in perception, not reality, and tied to desires of wealthy
Amenity migration is tied to this dichotomy, with wealthy former urban people effectively suburbanizing the rural areas
It serves as yet another commodification of the landscape, post-productive to be sure, but no less controlled by globalization
There are class dimensions present in the contemporary rural-urban perceptive division, with 'rural' being idealized, separated from its heritage


15.  Nelson, Peter B. 2001. Rural restructuring in the American West: land use, family and class discourses. Journal of Rural Studies 17: 395-407

The US West is transforming as globalization proceeds, with cities becoming nodes for massive development tied to global processes
Economies tied to natural production have been typical of rural regions, along with boom/bust cycles, but new pressures have emerged
Significant migration is taking place, leading to sometimes dramatic shifts in the composition of rural communities along with conflict
The shift in rural human composition, with wealthy in-migrants from the middle class arriving, is likely to be accompanied by new class division
SIgnificant variation exists between and within communities as to the effects of these shifts in politics, demographics, values, so on
Restrictions from government regulation are perceived as becoming more of a factor, along with moneyed interests from would-be buyers


16.  Pickerill, Jenny, & Chatterton, Pau. 2006. Notes towards autonomous geographies: creation, resistance, and self-management as survival tactics. Progress in Human Geography 30(6): 730-746

Autonomous geographies are spaces for people to organize on a non-capitalist basis, using resistance, creation - zapatistas an example
Emphasis here is intended to "explore the materialization of utopian visions" and pursue alter-globalisation, tied to anti-capitalism and social justic
Time and space are less important than collection of ideas and movements tha transcend these, seeks to undermine reliance on capitalist institutions
Autonomy is in constant negotiation with non-autonomy, a combination of resistance, creation, that is rooted in praxis
Differences inherent between individual autonomy and collective autonomy, in tension, with autonomy vulnerable to capture by regressive interests
4 pillars: "political ownership and control, cultural and media literacy, the self-determination of organizational forms, and economic self-reliance"
Globalization best seen as tied to particular narratives, presents as self-evident/inexorable but counter-globalization wants to mitigate this hegemony
Scale broadly crossed, local actions take on global significance, workshops/speeches travel globe, autonomy utilizes global network of spaces
Because autoomy is not strictly linked to territory, it is in constant negotiation, and must deal with global capitalist economy
Autonomy is tied to specific acts and broader structures, multiple strategies, and global networks for idea sharing, but material impacts too
Building autonomous geographies requires pragmatism, learning from failure, self-organization and efforts to achieve consensus
Significant self-awareness necessary to avoid internal power imbalances rooted around gender, assertiveness, dealing with external judgement


17.  Roche, Michael. 2005. Rural geography: A borderland revisited. Progress in Human Geography 29(3): 299-303

Rural geography has emphasized multiple approaches, leading to different debates within the subfield with respect to directions, umw
Production and consumption are linked via commodity chains, but localisation is not necessarily tied to more sustainable/socially progressive outcomes


18.  Sherman, Jennifer, and Rayna, Sage. 2011. Sending Off All Your Good Treasures: Rural Schools, Brain-Drain, and Community Survival in the Wake of Economic Collapse. Journal of Research in Rural Education 26(11): 1-14

'Golden Valley, CA' - a pseudonym for the actual town - is a Northwest town traditionally supported by timber industry, which collapsed, taking town too
Spotted Owl Ruling of 1990 banned timber harvesting in Spotted Owl habitat, causing closure of mills and end of timber industry in area.
The result for the town was the loss of male jobs, leaving the town an "economic black hole", leading to major outmigration.
Education in Golden Valley became a focal point, as it was one of the few remaining employment options and surviving community centers
But the most talented youth often see no future in remaining in town, and leave, leading to outmigration of needed people
But a bifurcation exists with respect to which youth get the investment by community needed to receive advantages of education
Those likely to succeed and/or are from the 'good' families are invested in, and they are the ones who leave because of lack of jobs.


19.  Woods, Michael. 2003. Deconstructing rural protest: the emergence of a new social movement. Journal of Rural Studies 19: 309-325

Rural places have been the site of increasing conflict and political debate in the developed world, not easily dismissed as mere local issues
Perceptions of what rural is and the value of being rural are both important to people, who are seen to protest things that they see as threatening rural
Conflicts are no longer rooted in the concerns of specific interest groups focusing on economic activities, new issues are coming to the fore
Rural areas traditionally were externally represented by economic interest groups, internally disciplined by paternalistic political relations
But this has begun to break down with push towards governance, and the increased movement of educated wealthy to rural places, undermining structures
Rural identity has largely become a unifying idea as the old systems have broken apart, a new basis for protest, not necessarily into governing
Even rural identity is contested, however, with 3 rural protest tracks observed: reactive, (traditional); progressive (new groups); aspirational (idyll)
Different groups use different strategies to make selves heard, all tend to resust state power, are broadly characterizable as a social movement


20.  Vergunst, Petra J.B. 2002. The Potentials and Limitations ofSelf-reliance and Self-suf?ficiency atthe Local Level: views from southern Sweden. Local Environment 7(2): 149-161

The rapidity of globalization has resulted in individuals being disembedded from the context which they derived personal meaning in the past
relocalisation has intent rooted in social and cultural worlds, to mitigate globalization impacts and retain control
self-reliance and self-sufficiency are tied to systems thinking through recognition of feedbacks and and redundancy being important
Adaptive management is another key concept to localisation given the ability of communities to react to changes and choose new paths
Bioregionalism also plays a part, tying local governance based on common biological conditions to political say in managing own affairs
Territoriality is also important when understanding localisation and bioregionalism, is connected to lifestyles of individuals and their resource us
Self-sufficiency is tied to a desire for needs for fiber, food, energy, so on, to be met locally, inherent material connection to landscape
Such demands high knowledge in hands of locals about ecological system, and could have differential effects on land uses depending on local conditions
Local variation, shifts in systems of power, are consequences of a shift to emphasize self-reliance and self-sufficiency
